---
date: 2021-05-06
module: Reading and studying literature
nocite: |
  @haslam2018, @bishop2004
title: What are the questions asked in Bishop’s *Questions of Travel*, and what if any answers does she give?
---

Elizabeth Bishop’s collection _Questions of Travel_ combines seemingly disparate subject matter: the Brazilian landscape, people, and culture, tourism, the history of colonialism, and memories of her childhood in New England and Nova Scotia. Yet despite this disjointedness there are underlying themes which draw them together, bringing into question the nature of travel and the traveller’s place in the world.

The eponymous poem ‘Questions of Travel’ itself addresses some of these themes of the entire collection. The perspective is that of a traveller, in this case specifically a tourist, a theme she also used in ‘Arrival at Santos’. The poem begins with description of Brazilian scenery, almost overwhelming: “too many waterfalls”, “so many clouds” (l. 1–3). She returns to details of Brazil as the poem progresses, the old stonework and the hanging clogs in a petrol station — both natural parts of the scenery and human-made ones attract her attention. But throughout the poem is the central question: why are the tourists there? Should they be there? There is an ethical aspect to this: “is it right to be watching strangers in a play” (l. 16); this may suggest a concern for the colonial perspective, of a relatively rich American or European able to treat the lives of other people as temporary entertainment before returning home in comfort. It is perhaps a kind of orientalism, where non-Westerners are presumed to exist only in relation to the Westerners observing them, rather than as people in their own right [@said2003].

But there is another side to her concern: it’s “childish” to rush around the world; “must we dream our dreams / and have them too?” (l. 26–27). A number of questions may arise from this concern from the impact of travel on the traveller. It suggests perhaps a negative effect of having dreams fulfilled too easily; that there might be something discouraging when nothing is entirely out of reach forever; fifty years later, this possibility might be more pertinent than ever. But it also suggests perhaps an unrootedness or alienation that could reflect Bishop’s own life; her tourist seems unable to settle in one place, as Bishop herself felt disconnected from her birthplace: “_…home, / wherever that may be?_” (l. 66–67).

Bishop’s answer to those questions, however, is not simply to oppose tourism and travel in general; by contrast, she observes that “it would have been a pity” not to have seen the things that the travellers encountered there; and the examples she gives are not merely tourist attractions but a deeper attention to detail, the “calligraphy” of birdcages and the “oratory” of rain. She sees unquestionable positive aspects to travel, despite some discomfort with the implications. She questions the truth of Pascal’s claim that all misery is the result of being unable to “sit quietly in one’s room”; though clearly there are doubts, the question is not entirely settled in favour of remaining home.

‘Arrival at Santos’ explores these same questions, without making them so explicit — yet also perhaps less sympathetic to the tourists. It begins, once again, with description of the scenery, which here is described oddly, negatively: ‘impractically shaped’ mountains, ‘sad and harsh’, ‘frivolous greenery’ (l. 3–4). The newly-arrived tourist, it seems, does not think much of what they see; and the narrator asks rhetorically ‘is this how this country is going to answer you / and your immodest demands for a different world \[…]?’; this seems to echo the uncertainty, in ‘Questions of Travel’, that travelling to see a different world is truly a valuable experience.

The tourist’s presumptions are also exposed here: ‘I somehow never thought of there being a flag’ (l. 16); they are able to arrive in a country never before having considered that this country will have the basic necessities of a functioning state, like coins and paper money. Similarly, ‘Ports are necessities’ which do not ‘seem to care what impression they make’ (l. 33–34); their functioning comes second to their attractiveness to the visitor, which, like the warehouses of the first stanza, is found lacking, and the traveller wastes no time in leaving, ‘driving to the interior’ without delay.

Thus, ‘Arrival at Santos’ does not for the most part ask questions itself; instead, it adds context, perhaps contributing to the answer partially provided in ‘Questions of Travel’, perhaps contradicting it. Perhaps significantly, in the original collection ‘Arrival at Santos’ appears before ‘Questions of Travel’; the questions are therefore made explicit only after some answers have begun to be provided, prompting a reconsideration of the first impressions. Indeed, it is possible to read the traveller–narrator in each as the same individual, perhaps reflecting on their own previous impressions of their journey.

In ‘Brazil, January 1, 1502’, the travel in question is for a different purpose altogether. The title refers to the date of the first arrival of Europeans in the region that is now Rio de Janeiro, and at first it appears similar to ‘Questions of Travel’, as well as ‘Arrival at Santos’ and ‘Manuelzinho’, for example, in detailing the unfamiliar scenery encountered by the conquerors. Foliage, flowers, wildlife, the sky itself; it is only in the final third of the poem that the focus moves to the Europeans. For them, we are told, Brazil represents ‘an old dream of wealth and luxury’. Reference is made to _L’Homme armé_, a late-medieval song with martial and Christian themes [@haslam2018 177], perhaps particularly implying a renewal of the Crusades, now not only against the Ottomans in the east but the newly-encountered non-Christian cultures in the west.

However, the criticism remains ambiguous, a suggestion of rape by the invaders (“each out to catch an Indian for himself”) left until almost the final lines, with the focus immediately shifting away (“or had the birds waked up?”) before ending entirely. Here Bishop hardly even raises the question of the purpose of travel and the ethicality of that purpose; yet while no answer is given, it might also seem to be self-evident. While Bishop avoided being overtly political in her work [@haslam2018 176], the choice of colonialism as subject matter and the decision to allude to rape suggest at least a concern with the issue, even if addressed with subtlety.

And again, the subject of the poem is not only of historical interest, but can be related to the critique of present-day travel made in ‘Questions of Travel’; the ability of the American traveller to view Brazil in such a way in the twentieth century is rooted in the way that the Portuguese conquerors viewed Brazil in the sixteenth. Bishop was aware of this, and aware in particular that her own relationship to Brazil was influenced by it; and so in addressing the subject of travel she is inevitably questioning her own neutrality as a writer, or indeed even the possibility of neutrality [@fortuny2003; in @haslam2018]. This non-neutral standpoint can be seen in ‘Arrival at Santos’, where the tourists are presented as shallow and perhaps ignorant, but which is narrated in a first-person perspective, giving an impression of a closer identification with these flaws.

So the questions raised by _Questions of Travel_ are, broadly, ethical ones, but also purposive ones: what is travel for? Is it a positive thing, and if so, for whom? Some of these are shown most clearly in the poem ‘Questions of Travel’ itself; but ‘Arrival at Santos’ raises them too, implicitly, with its unflattering portrayal of the newly-arriving tourist. ‘Brazil, January 1, 1502’ in turn depicts a different sort of travel, but again raises ethical questions that have a bearing on the travellers of the present-day poems too. Yet Bishop fails to provide direct answers, seeming at first critical of the tourist and then (in ‘Questions of Travel’) defending the experience and its value; she avoids political commentary on the morality of colonial history in ‘Brazil, January 1, 1502’, but even to raise the question is to suggest a degree of critique. In the other poems of this collection, too, a sympathy with the Brazilian people and particularly the poor can be seen — ‘Manuelzinho’, ‘The Burglar of Babylon’ — and reading these all in light of one another may lend further weight to the idea of an anticolonial sentiment behind them.
