---
module: Reading and studying literature
nocite: |
  @joyce2000, @haslam2018
title: Anonymity and social contact in early-20th-century Dublin and New York
wordcount: 1267
---

Cities were a common theme of modernist writers; by the early 20th century, the urban population in Europe and the United States had increased in size and significance, and presented new social and moral questions with which to grapple. They were a site of contradictions: on the one hand, freedom from the constraints and prejudices of smaller communities, and the possibility of other forms of community, whether racial, as in Harlem, New York, or sexual, as for example in San Francisco, whose gay community began to develop during this period [@sibalis2004]; on the other hand, loneliness and isolation, the negative aspect of anonymity.

James Joyce’s *Dubliners* (1914) expresses some aspects of this contradiction. In his Dublin, the traditional social connections are undermined, and new ones found; but the old moral imperatives cannot be avoided, and social interaction does not always mean an escape from loneliness.

In ‘The Boarding House’, these old and new worldviews come into conflict. The boarding house in question is run by Mrs Mooney, and plays host to a range of transient figures. This in itself was a relatively new kind of institution: the increase over the last decades in people travelling from the country to the city for work had produced a greater need for new kinds of living arrangements, outside the nuclear family ideal. Rather than an individual living with their parents before marriage, and afterwards with their new spouse, they might live with strangers temporarily before leaving the city and returning home or travelling to another city for work, or indeed finding a partner.

But there is an immediate contradiction: though Mrs Mooney is clearly deeply concerned with respectability throughout the story — indeed, it appears to be her primary motivation — her business is one of questionable respectability in itself. Her regular clientele seems to include itinerant actors, a generally disreputable community and one often associated with prostitution in the nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries. And indeed, Mrs Mooney’s nickname ‘Madam’ alludes to a brothel in turn. The demands of the city are contradictory: she is taking one of the few career paths left open to women in this conservative society, yet she is under the pressures of the modern economy for her clientele, which acts to undermine her respectability.

Mr Doran, too, experiences the contradictions of the city. He is single, with a respectable job, yet somewhat lonely, living in a boarding house; his neighbours are either other single men like himself or otherwise transient short-term guests. As noted, this is a particularly modern lifestyle; and yet it is precarious, dependant on the Catholic morality of Dublin society. A perceived indiscretion in his personal life might cost him his job; moreover, despite the isolation of the city, he cannot expect to be completely anonymous: his actions will haunt him wherever he goes. Dublin was ‘such a small city: everyone knows everyone else’s business’ (p. 61); though the city promises social contact, social contact is not always desirable.

For Polly, the contradiction presents itself in a different way again: a young woman at that time could not avoid the question of marriage for long. For a time she had worked outside of the home, but this has been disrupted; her mother is thus increasingly desperate to find a husband for her. Social contact is thus a necessity, whether it is desirable or not. It is not a direct threat to her as it is for Mr Doran: he may wish that there could be less of it, that he could be more anonymous, but for Polly it cannot be avoided if she is to be married. Marriage is in turn inevitable and inescapable: she is given no choice in the matter, either by her mother or the expectations of respectable Dublin, and while she might be upset at the prospect, she must make her peace with it.

Joyce’s Dublin is thus an ambiguous one. He does not paint the moral strictures of Catholic society in a positive light; yet modernity seems to offer no escape from tradition. The city offers new ways of living, yet the confines of the old social expectations remain, and as with many of Joyce’s characters in *Dubliners*, Mr Doran and Polly eventually resign themselves to their fates.

Langston Hughes’ ‘Pushcart Man’ presents a very different vision of the city. Harlem in New York had been described by Claude McKay as ‘the Negro capital of the world’ [@haslam2018 87]. Hughes describes a busy street in the heart of this community. Both social contact and anonymity are inherent and intertwined in this sense of community: they are both results of the sheer scale of the city which makes possible its status as a ‘capital of the world’. The narrator describes a series of people, all anonymous or mostly anonymous, and is anonymous in turn; but this anonymity is a result of the sheer scale of the city, a scale which itself brought possibilities of social contact and which numerous writers, including Hughes (p. 88), had remarked upon.

In the structure of the poem the themes of anonymity and society develop alongside one another. Almost nobody is named; people are described by their appearance or their occupation, as the narrator observes strangers in the street. The exception is Mary, who is named by her companion: the narrator is given a glimpse of their life, a fragment of knowledge about them revealed by their relationship to one another. Even the eponymous ‘Pushcart Man’ is identified only by his occupation, disappearing from view at the end of the poem as he returns home; but unlike Joyce, Hughes does not present this anonymity as melancholy, but part of the joy of the city. Even the threat of a fistfight fails to detract from this: the characters are flawed, aggressive, but it is a human flaw and only temporary, stopping as quickly as it started as life carries on around the adversaries.

Hart Crane gives us a very different view of New York in ‘To Brooklyn Bridge’. It is not a city of bustling human activity, of everyday interaction, as in Hughes’ poem, but a grand superhuman force. Even the language expresses this: rather than the plain description of an everyday scene and the comfort that can be found there, Crane writes in a grandiose style, as if offering praise to a god.

Even when humans do appear, the ‘multitudes bent towards some flashing scene’ (l. 10), they are not merely anonymous but an indistinct mass. Where Hughes picks out one individual after another to describe separately, Crane’s humans are almost incidental, a minor aspect of the city rather than its heart: they go from work to the cinema, and are only distinguishable from the mass in a moment of tragedy: the suicide of the ‘bedlamite’ (L18–20). The focus of the poem is on structures, not human relationships; the bridge could be a natural phenomenon rather than an artificial creation, and has more in common with Shelley’s Mont Blanc than Hughes’ Harlem.

For each of these authors, therefore, the city involved a degree of anonymity, yet the nature of that anonymity varied. For Joyce, it was insufficient to escape the restrictions of a conservative society that policed individual behaviour: Dublin may have been anonymous, but was not anonymous *enough*. For Hughes, anonymity seems part of the life of the city: a crowd of people, each with their own stories, which we see only fragments of as we pass by, an immeasurable number of social connections. For Crane, the city takes on a life of its own, beyond human scale; the anonymity is total and inescapable.
