---
title: With reference to recent case law interpreting the partial defences of loss of control and diminished responsibility, consider whether the legislation gets the right balance in the imposition of criminal liability, if a drug addict kills his wife after discovering she was having an affair.
date: 27 November 2017
---

The Coroners and Justice Act 2009 defined two partial defences for murder, amending the Homicide Act 1957. The defence of diminished responsibility was redefined, ostensibly based on medical developments in the intervening period; and the previous defence of provocation was abolished and replaced with a new defence of loss of control, based upon significant criticisms of the definition and interpretation of the previous defence. In the given case, the defendant would have a potential defence on both grounds; however, both grounds would involve controversies and ambiguities that remain unresolved.

### Addiction

Prior to the 2009 Act there was case law regarding intoxication and addiction and their relevance to both provocation and diminished responsibility defences. The ‘reasonable person’ standard was described in _R v Camplin_[^1] as being ‘an ordinary person of either sex’. However, it was also accepted that age was to be accounted for when judging the reasonableness of the defendant’s actions, both in terms of the gravity of the situation and the defendant’s capacity for self-control. Following this, in a series of cases, the reasonable person against whom the defendant was to be compared was held to share a range of personal characteristics with the defendant; thus, in _R v Morhall_,[^2] the defendant, who had killed the victim after being taunted about his drug use, was (in effect) to be held to the standard of ‘the reasonable gluesniffer’. However, here the House of Lords distinguished between characteristics which had a bearing on the gravity of the provocation, and those which had an effect on the defendant’s capacity for self-control.

This line of reasoning was not wholly straightforward; _R v Luc_,[^3] a Privy Council case in Hong Kong, where the law on provocation was ostensibly identical to that in England and Wales, it was affirmed that provocation should be treated objectively; medical evidence impacting on the defendant’s ability to exercise self-control was not to be taken into account, and should instead form part of a diminished responsibility defence. However, in _R v Smith (Morgan)_,[^4] this was not followed, and the defendant’s medical conditions (a depressive disorder) were taken into account as part of the supposedly objective test of his capacity for self-control. Then once again in _Attorney-General for Jersey v Holley_,[^5] the Privy Council returned to the \_Camplin _conception of the reasonable person.

The replacement of provocation with loss of control brought with it a clarification of which characteristics and circumstances could be taken into account. Specifically, it excluded “those whose only relevance to D's conduct is that they bear on D's general capacity for tolerance or self-restraint”. This brings it closer into line with Ashworth’s argument in the 1970s that provocation ought to be reserved for those who are ‘mentally normal’ and that ‘abnormalities of mind’ were within the ambit of diminished responsibility.[^6] _R v Asmelash_[^7] confirmed that voluntary intoxication would not be considered part of the circumstances relevant to the loss of control defence.

The stronger defence for a drug addict would be on the ground of diminished responsibility. The 2009 Act made a relatively smaller change to this defence, as compared to provocation/loss of control, but the effect of the change, along with the tendency of the courts, has been to reduce rather than to expand the opportunities to rely on the defence. Specifically, the previous ‘abnormality of mind’, which might have arisen from one of a number of causes, has been redefined as an ‘abnormality of mental functioning’ arising from a ‘recognised medical condition’.

The courts, as mentioned, have tended to restrict the application of diminished responsibility in circumstances involving intoxication. In _R v Dowds_,[^8] a heavy drinker who was nevertheless not addicted to alcohol was unsuccessful in arguing diminished responsibility; although intoxication was a recognized medical condition, this was held to be a necessary part of the defence but not sufficient in itself to found the defence.

Even addiction itself is not necessarily sufficient to sustain a defence of diminished responsibility. In _R v Tandy_,[^9] the defendant was an alcoholic; nevertheless, it was successfully argued that she had control over the first drink of the day. An abnormality of mind produced by alcoholism, it was held, must be significant enough to cause brain damage and make the drinking entirely involuntary if it is to be relied on as part of a diminished responsibility defence; voluntary intoxication, as in Dowds, is not a defence.

The decision in Tandy has been questioned, however, as medical opinion of alcoholism has changed; in _R v Wood_[^10] the requirement for observable brain damage was rejected. As such it is possible that in future, an addiction might be found to provide a successful defence of diminished responsibility.

However, it may also be seen that most of the case law on addiction has related to alcoholism, i.e., to legal drug usage. It may be that there are public policy reasons not to permit involuntary intoxication with illegal drugs to provide a defence of diminished responsibility, since even voluntary intoxication would be illegal in itself. In _R v Kay_[^11] the defendant was both schizophrenic and had taken a combination of illegal drugs; once again, voluntary intoxication was not a sufficient defence, and the mental illness alone was found not to be sufficient to provide a defence. However, this provides no further clarity on involuntary intoxication.

###  Sexual infidelity

The old defence of provocation had attracted significant controversy by the time of its abolition, mostly due to the apparent contradiction between its successful use as a defence by husbands who claimed to have been provoked to violence by their wives’ adultery, and the converse failure by wives who killed their abusive husbands. The definitive example is _R v Duffy_,[^12] which provided the test for provocation; the law has been described as ‘inherently gendered’[^13] and ‘[tending]() to tolerate, if not actually indulge, male violence’.[^14]

Under the new defence of loss of control, a ‘qualifying trigger’ for the behaviour is required; sexual infidelity is explicitly excluded from consideration. This is significant: one study in the 1980s found that possessiveness or sexual jealousy were factors in 45 percent of cases of violence against women by their male partners.[^15] In fact, sexual infidelity is one of only three exclusions listed in the 2009 Act (the other two covering situations where the defendant had instigated the circumstances in order to provide a loss of control defence). This in turn has not escaped criticism as to the necessity of singling out sexual infidelity; it is expected that in most cases, a disallowed qualifying trigger would be excluded by the requirement for a ‘\_justifiable\_ sense of being seriously wronged’ [emphasis added](); several sources use the example of so- called honour killings here. Moreover, the additional requirement that the trial judge exercise his or her discretion on the viability of a loss of control defence and whether to permit the jury to consider it serves as a safeguard compared to the previous state of affairs, where if there was any possibility of a provocation, the jury was to be permitted to consider it. The implication here seems to be that while certain purported qualifying triggers are clearly unjustifiable, and would therefore be excluded by the judge, an accusation of sexual infidelity is not necessarily clearly unjustifiable but is to be excluded on public policy grounds anyway.

The interpretation of qualifying triggers and their exclusions has in turn been controversial. In _R v Clinton_,[^16] the defendant had killed his wife after she taunted him about her sexual infidelity and his suicidal thoughts; the trial judge duly excluded the sexual infidelity as a qualifying trigger and as such found that there was insufficient evidence for a defence of loss of control to be considered by the jury. On appeal, it was found that, while sexual infidelity itself was excluded, taunting was not, and that when there was a valid qualifying trigger, the entire circumstances (including the sexual infidelity) ought to be considered in determining whether to allow the jury to consider the defence. This, in fact, was the very situation predicted by Norrie in an article written just after the Act came into force.[^17]

This raises some concerns that, despite its specific exclusion by Parliament, sexual infidelity could be reintroduced as a justification by the back door. There is the potential that even if other factors were relatively minor and the sexual infidelity was the primary trigger for the homicide, the existence of these other factors plus the sexual infidelity could be considered of ‘sufficient weight’ that they should be presented to the jury. And yet conversely, as raised by Norrie, a situation where a campaign of taunting is involved, some of which related to sexual infidelity, cannot justly be excluded or meaningfully divided into included and excluded taunts.

[^1]: [1978] AC 705 (HL), [1978] 2 WLR 679.
[^2]: [1996] 1 AC 90 (HL), [1995] 3 WLR 330.
[^3]: [1997] AC 131 (PC), [1996] 3 WLR 45.
[^4]: [2001] 1 AC 146 (HL), [2000] 3 WLR 654.
[^5]: [2005] UKPC 23, [2005] 2 AC 580.
[^6]: Andrew Ashworth, ‘The Doctrine of Provocation’ (1976) 35 CLJ 292, 312.
[^7]: [2013] EWCA Crim 157, [2014] QB 103.
[^8]: [2012] EWCA Crim 281, [2012] 1 WLR 2576.
[^9]: [1989] 1 All ER 267.
[^10]: [2008] EWCA Crim 1305, [2009] 1 WLR 496.
[^11]: [2017] EWCA Crim 647, [2017] 4 WLR 121.
[^12]: [1949] 1 All ER 932.
[^13]: Edwards, S.S.M., ‘Anger and Fear as Justifiable Preludes for Loss of Self-Control’ (2010) 74 JCL 223, 226.
[^14]: Michael Allen, _Criminal Law_ (OUP 2017) 363.
[^15]: R Dobash and R Dobash, ‘The Nature and Antecedents of Violent Events’ (1984) 24 BJ Crim 269, quoted in Jeremy Horder, _Provocation and Responsibility_ (OUP 1992) 192.
[^16]: [2012] EWCA Crim 2, [2013] QB 1.
[^17]: Alan Norrie, ‘The Coroners and Justice Act 2009 — partial defences to murder (1) Loss of control’ (2010) 4 Crim LR 275, 288.
