---
date: 19 March 2018
module: Tort
title: ‘The law on vicarious liability is utterly devoid of logic and good sense.’ Discuss.
---

The doctrine of vicarious liability has undergone significant changes over the last decades. It can be found in English law dating back at least to the 17th century,[^1] and was well-established by the late 19th century, by which time the courts began to define the kinds of relationship which would be amenable to vicarious liability.[^2] The test became codified in the early 20th century,[^3] and this codification remained the standard for much of the next hundred years. However, more recent cases have redefined the tests both for the forms of relationship and the kinds of wrongful acts which might give rise to vicarious liability. In turn this has led to a debate about the theoretical basis and purpose of the doctrine.

These policy reasons were most notably summarized in the 1960s by Patrick Atiyah.[^4] There was particular emphasis here on two related concepts: firstly, that by employing a particular person, and receiving the benefit of that employment, the employer also take on any liabilities arising from that employment; and secondly, that the employer was best-placed to accept the risk, being in a position to put policies in place and to take out insurance, the costs of which could be passed on to customers in the form of marginal price rises. This is contrasted with a situation where an employee was liable for their own torts committed during employment; not only would the employer take the benefit but not the full cost of the employment, but the employee would likely need insurance on an individual level, or risk bankruptcy (in turn leading to the claimant being unable to receive compensation for the harm done to them). However, more recently, Claire McIvor has criticized the application of vicarious liability to non-profit organizations on the ground that this theory of enterprise risk and loss-spreading cannot apply in the same way.[^5] She argues that the decisions in major recent cases have failed to take into account the rationale behind vicarious liability, and equally have failed to articulate an alternative rationale.

The reformulation of the test for vicarious liability operated across both its limbs: that of the relationship between tortfeasor and defendant and the connection between that relationship and the tort. The former was most notably expanded in a pair of similar cases, _JGE v English Province of Our Lady of Charity_[^6] and _Catholic Child Welfare Society v Various Claimants_.[^7] Prior to these cases, the question (as formulated by Salmond) was whether the tort occurred in the ‘course of employment’; as such, there could be no vicarious liability in relationships other than employment, although there had been significant case law regarding grey areas such as contractors, dual employment, and the like. In _JGE_, the tortfeasor was a Roman Catholic priest and as such the action was brought against the diocese, who in defence argued that they were not the priest’s employer. The Court of Appeal disagreed, on various grounds; in particular, it was noted that the bishop had disciplinary powers over the priests in his diocese, and that in this and other ways the priest’s position was more like that of an employee than an entrepreneur or independent contractor.

The decision in _JGE_ was subsequently approved by the Supreme Court in _Various Claimants_. The latter case related not to the Roman Catholic Church itself but to a Catholic religious order (the Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools) and a school for which they taught. The school was found to be vicariously liable for abuse carried out by the members of the Institute that it employed; it appealed on the basis that liability should be shared by the Institute, who in turn offered the defence that the members were not employees; it was an unincorporated association, whose members were employed by the school (and others); and, indeed, the members took a vow of poverty and thus paid their earnings to a charitable trust associated with the Institute.

Nevertheless, the Supreme Court considered that, as in _JGE_, the relationship between the Institute and its members was sufficiently ‘akin to employment’, including the existence of hierarchy, rules, and a disciplinary procedure, that it would be ‘fair and just’ to impose vicarious liability.

The second limb of the two-part test for vicarious liability began to face problems even earlier than the first, in _Lister v Hesley Hall_.[^8] That case, like _JGE_ and _Various Claimants_, related to sexual abuse; in _Lister_, while it was accepted by all parties that the tortfeasor was an employee, it was argued by the defendant that the abuse occurred outside the course of employment. Up to that point the law had been (with _Trotman v North Yorkshire County Council_[^9] as the leading case) that sexual abuse could not pass the Salmond test, as it could neither be regarded as an act authorized by the employer, nor as a wrongful and unauthorized mode of doing an act authorized by the employer. On its face, this seems reasonable: a person employed to care for children, who subsequently sexually assaults them, could fairly be characterized as doing precisely the opposite of what he or she was employed to do. However, the court at first instance also held that the employer had not been negligent in failing to prevent the abuse, and the Court of Appeal additionally held that an employer could not be vicariously liable for an employee’s failure to report or prevent abuse when that abuse was itself outside the scope of employment. It was left to the House of Lords to reconfigure the test, based on the then-recent Canadian cases of _Bazley v Curry_[^10] and _Jacobi v Griffiths_,[^11] which considered firstly, that the question of the fairness of holding the employer liable should be addressed directly, rather than ‘obscuring’ it behind discussions of the scope of employment, and secondly that vicarious liability stemmed fundamentally from the wrongful act being ‘sufficiently related’ to authorized conduct, ‘even if unrelated to the employer’s desires’. On this basis, the House of Lords considered that since the potential for abuse had been created by the defendant’s employment of the tortfeasor, the defendant was vicariously liable.

A similar issue was seen in _Mohamud v Wm Morrison Supermarkets_ .[^12] In that case, an employee of the defendant had responded to an enquiry by the claimant, a customer, by assaulting him. The defendant, naturally, argued that this was no part of the employee’s job description, and at first instance the court agreed that there was not a sufficiently close connection between the employment and the tort for vicarious liability to apply, even given the new, broader test established in _Lister_. Nevertheless, the claimant argued, on appeal to the Supreme Court, that the test should be expanded yet further, to including a question of ’representative capacity’, which is to say whether a reasonable observer would believe the tortfeasor to be acting as a representative of the defendant at the time of the tort. Naturally there are issues with such a test (namely, that it might be difficult to convince a reasonable observer that racist assaults were within a supermarket’s policies simply because they were committed by a person wearing the supermarket’s uniform), and the Supreme Court rejected this expansion of the criteria; however, they did overturn the decision of the trial judge and Court of Appeal, finding that the ‘field of activities’ assigned to the tortfeasor included within it the conduct at issue: he was assigned to ‘attend to customers and to respond to their inquiries’, and he did so, albeit in a ‘foul mouthed’ and ‘inexcusable’ way. Moreover, by ordering the claimant never to return to the employer’s premises, he purported to ‘act about his employer’s business’.

Claire McIvor’s critique referred, in part, to the potential problems of extending vicarious liability from profit-making to non-profit organizations. She observes that, however, there has been an increasing breakdown in the distinction between non-profit and for-profit organizations in terms of the kinds of services they provide; while at the start of the 20th century, as AJP Taylor put it, ‘a sensible, law-abiding Englishman could pass through life hardly noticing the existence of the state’,[^13] over the course of the century an increasing number of formerly-privately-run services were transferred to the state, and then (after 1979) transferred back again. For McIvor, the use of the enterprise risk and loss-spreading justifications for vicarious liability of non-profit organizations is flawed, with the risk that in the face of unmanageable costs the services will simply be withdrawn (a concern that would equally apply to services outsourced to for-profit organizations, where revenue may come entirely or primarily from the outsourcer and as such profits are based on the ability of the contractor to reduce costs wherever possible). One response to this criticism, of course, is that an organization that cannot guarantee that risks will be kept to an acceptable level should not be in a position of providing services.

An alternative basis for a ‘fair and just’ decision, in the absence of a modification to the principle of vicarious liability, could be found through imposing a direct duty (or strengthening existing duties) on the employer. The possibility was considered in _Lister_, for example, of liability for negligently failing to prevent the abuse; however, it was rejected at first instance and not subsequently appealed. However, there is also the complication (as argued, again, by McIvor) of conflating the direct liability of the employer with the vicarious liability; in _Lister_, the duty of the defendant to the complainants was delegated to and breached by the tortfeasor, for which the defendant was described as being vicariously liable but may be better described as directly liable.

Another potential issue with the traditional Salmond test is once again arising through socioeconomic change, in the form of the increasing prevalence of the ‘gig economy’; that is, an employment model of quasi-independent contractors, often mediated through technology in a way that would have been infeasible in previous decades (Uber being the classic example of such employers). While a full discussion of the benefits and drawbacks of such a model for employers and employees is outside the scope of this essay, it can be noted in particular that it tends to allow the employer to minimize their responsibilities towards the employee, for example in terms of minimum wage and paid holiday leave. It is important, therefore, that the law of vicarious liability continue to develop (as it has in _JGE_, _Various Claimants_, etc.) on a basis of judging the relationship by its nature in practice, and not adhere overly-strictly to a formalism that might allow an employer to exert a close level of control over the employee while avoiding a commensurate degree of responsibility for the employee’s wrongdoing.

However, the fact that this development is necessary (and, indeed, taking place) is not a sign of incoherence but precisely the opposite: for the law to remain static while society changed around it would be devoid of logic. While concerns are raised about the applicability of vicarious liability to defendants that may not be able to bear that liability, no alternative is proposed but to more strictly apply a test formulated for Victorian society and economy with no attempt to meet modern needs.

_Word count: 2019_

[^1]: _Jones v Hart_ (1698) 2 Salkeld 441, 91 ER 382.

[^2]: _Yewens v Noakes_ (1881) 6 QBD 530.

[^3]: John Salmond, _The law of torts_ (Stevens and Haynes, 1907) 83.

[^4]: PS Atiyah, _Vicarious liability in the law of torts_ (Butterworths, 1967) 26.

[^5]: Claire McIvor, ‘The use and abuse of the doctrine of vicarious liability’ (2006) 35 CLWR 268.

[^6]: \[2012] EWCA Civ 938, \[2013] QB 722.

[^7]: \[2012] UKSC 56, \[2013] 2 AC 1.

[^8]: \[2001] UKHL 22, \[2002] AC 215.

[^9]: \[1998] EWCA Civ 1208, (1998) 10 Admin LR 573.

[^10]: \[1999] 2 SCR 534, 1999 CanLII 692 (Supreme Court of Canada).

[^11]: \[1999] 2 SCR 570, 1999 CanLII 693 (Supreme Court of Canada).

[^12]: \[2016] UKSC 11, \[2016] AC 677.

[^13]: AJP Taylor, _English history, 1914–1945_ (Penguin, 1965) 25.
