---
date: 6 November 2017
module: Equity and Trusts
title: “Although there has been much debate and confusion in the past, the tests for certainty of objects are now clear and satisfactory.” Critically assess the validity of the above statement.
---

The requirements for the establishment of a trust developed through case law, particularly during the 19th century. While, earlier in the century, the courts were broad in their interpretation of wills, holding trusts to have been created by relatively unspecific language, as time passed the interpretative requirements grew narrower and more precisely defined. A turning point was *Knight v Knight*,[^1] in which were laid out three requirements (the ‘three certainties’) which must be defined in order for a will to be construed as creating a trust (and not, for example, making a gift). Over the following century the case law around each requirement developed separately. In this instance, it is the third requirement with which we are concerned; per Langdale MR: ‘the objects or persons intended to have the benefit of the recommendation or wish be also certain.’ This essay will attempt first to summarize the case law around this requirement, and then to examine the potential ambiguities and flaws in its current interpretation.

Clarity around the certainty of objects is complicated by differences between types of trusts and powers in terms of what standard of certainty is required. While prior to the 1970s both fixed and discretionary trusts used the same ‘complete list’ test, a set of cases in the House of Lords and Court of Appeal altered this for discretionary trusts. As a result, the conditions for discretionary trusts overlap with those for powers of appointment, while being distinct from fixed trusts; in turn, the lines between discretionary trusts and trust powers has been blurred to the extent that some sources have treated them as synonymous.[^2] Finally, the validity of gifts with condition precedent is also dependent on certainty of objects, with yet another test.

The leading case for fixed trusts is *Inland Revenue Commissioners v Broadway Cottages Trust*.[^3] This concerned a pair of institutions which had received charitable donations from a purported trust established by a will, while the plaintiffs claimed that this trust was invalid. The beneficiaries of the trust were any employees of any companies owned by the settlor, plus a range of other individuals and groups, and finally the two defendant charities. It was held that trusts where the trustees have ‘uncontrolled discretion to determine the person or persons falling within the class of beneficiaries to whom any distribution is to be made’ are void for uncertainty unless the class of beneficiaries can be ascertained, on the grounds that were the class unascertainable, it would be impossible for the court to execute the trust. To begin with, this was still rather broader than the current law: the court’s criteria here would have included both fixed and discretionary trusts, and these remained unified in this regard for the next fifteen years.

In the intervening period, *Re Gulbenkian’s Settlement Trusts*[^4] was decided; relating not to trusts but to powers of appointment. Here it was held that it was not necessary to be able to produce a complete list of all potential beneficiaries at the time the power is to be exercised, since this would invalidate some otherwise reasonable classes; rather, it would be sufficiently certain if it was possible to determine ‘whether a particular person is or is not, on the facts at a particular time, within one of the classes of beneficiaries’. In his judgment, Lord Reid used the example of a power to give money to ‘the descendants of X’, calling it perfectly valid and arguing that ‘it surely cannot become invalid because before the power is exercised some descendant of X has emigrated with his family and cannot be traced’; in this he explicitly disagreed with the judgment in *Broadway Cottages*.

The distinction now made between the tests for fixed and discretionary trusts was introduced in *McPhail v Doulton*.[^5] The clause in contention here stipulated that the trustees were given absolute discretion to make grants from the income of the trust, for the benefit of employees, ex-employees, or relatives of employees or ex-employees of a particular firm; it was contested on the grounds that this was insufficiently certain. In the lower courts, it had been a matter of contention whether the clause created a trust or a power; it was initially held that it was a power, and the Court of Appeal agreed but (as *Re Gulbenkian* had been decided in the meantime) that the *Gulbenkian* test ought to have been applied to determine validity. The House of Lords, on the other hand, held that it was in fact a trust, but that nevertheless the *Gulbenkian* test was the correct one for trust powers (i.e., discretionary trusts). In his judgment, Lord Wilberforce agreed that (as in *Broadway Cottages* and others) the validity of a trust depended on the ability of the court to execute it; however, he rejected the notion that it was therefore necessary to be able to divide the trust property equally between beneficiaries (which was the justification for the fixed list test).

After *McPhail v Doulton* was decided by the House of Lords, it was remanded to the Court of Appeal as *Re Baden’s Deed Trusts (no. 2)*[^6] in order to decide, using the new test, whether the contentious clause was valid or void for uncertainty. In particular, the House of Lords did not provide any clarity regarding how the *Gulbenkian* test ought to be applied in practice: this was left for the Court of Appeal to determine. In doing so, the court drew a distinction between conceptual certainty and evidential certainty: the former relating to the definition of the class itself, and the latter relating to the possibility of determining whether a particular individual (or all individuals) fell within the class. Although this distinction was not new,[^7] here it was elaborated upon to determine in what circumstances a trust might fail to establish either kind of certainty. In particular, the court held that ‘family’ and ‘dependents’ were both conceptually certain (although the judges disagreed on the precise definition); conversely, the example of ‘someone with a moral obligation’ was given as one which was conceptually uncertain. However, in the matter of evidential certainty, the three judges applied three differing tests, leaving uncertainty as to how to establish certainty in future.

Since *McPhail*, several other cases have clarified further aspects of certainty of objects. *Re Tuck’s Settlement Trusts*[^8] addressed the possibility of using a third party to clarify the definition of a class: the trust in question required the beneficiary to be of the Jewish faith and to have a Jewish wife, and in case of uncertainty, stipulated that this uncertainty was to be resolved by a Chief Rabbi. This distinguished it from the similar case of *Clayton v Ramsden*,[^9] where the requirement to be of the Jewish faith was uncertain: an independent adjudicator can establish certainty where it would otherwise not exist. In *Re Barlow’s Will Trusts*,[^10] a gift (rather than a trust) was to be granted to ‘friends and family’; it was held not to be void for uncertainty as it was possible, in context, to find a workable definition of ‘friends’. (This was simpler for a gift than for a trust: specifically, it was to grant an option to any friend of the deceased to buy the deceased’s artwork at below market value; since the onus on a gift with condition precedent would be on the purported friend, not the trustees, to prove friendship, it was not to be expected that the trustees be able to list all of the deceased friends.)

However, there do remain ambiguities around the establishment of certainty of objects. Most significant is the unclear judgment in *Re Baden (no. 2)*; as noted above, the three judges agreed that the trust in question was valid, but they differed in the reasoning by which they each reached this conclusion, and these differences would seem to be mutually contradictory. In Sachs LJ’s interpretation, ‘the court is never defeated by evidential uncertainty’, since if any given individual cannot be proved to be within the class of beneficiaries, they must be without it. Conversely, for Megaw LJ, it is necessary to establish that ‘a significant number’ of potential beneficiaries can be said to meet the criteria, even if it may be impossible to prove for others whether they meet the criteria or not; implicit in this is the possibility that a trust may be void for evidential certainty. Finally, for Stamp LJ, it was unquestionably necessary that it be possible to say in every case whether an individual is or is not within the class. This means that, while there is no doubt that the class of relatives is certain and valid, there is little clarity as to what kind of class will or will not be found valid in future.

The clarity of the law around certainty of objects is further complicated by the fact that, although *Broadway Cottages* remains the leading case for fixed trusts and not discretionary trusts, the trust in that case was in fact discretionary. Indeed, the court noted that ‘the qualifications for inclusion in the class of “beneficiaries” prescribed by the Schedule are sufficiently precise to make it possible to determine with certainty whether any particular individual is or is not a member of the class,’ i.e., that the trust passed the any-given-postulant test; however, that ‘it would be impossible at any given time to achieve a complete and exhaustive enumeration of all the persons then qualified for Inclusion in the class of “beneficiaries” under the terms of the Schedule’; i.e., it did not pass the fixed-list test.

Nevertheless, Lord Wilberforce’s reasoning for differentiating between fixed and discretionary trusts remains persuasive. The decision is based on the underlying principle that the central question is not one of applying a particular test, but simply of being able to execute the trust; naturally, the ability to execute then depends on the requirements of the trust. A trust where the property or proceeds thereof is to be divided in its totality among every member, for example, requires that every member be known, and therefore requires the fixed list test; conversely, there may be no need to list every possible beneficiary for a trust intended to make discretionary payments to some but not all members of the class.

An extension of this reasoning might lead to a tentative acceptance of Megaw LJ’s formulation of the any-given-postulant test; while it is necessary to show that the conditions can be met in a general sense, and that the chosen beneficiaries do meet the conditions, it is no barrier to executing the trust if certain individuals cannot be said for certain to meet or fail the conditions, since the trustees would anyway be within their power not to execute the trust in the favour of every individual who meets the conditions. This would follow the principle that the aim of the court should be to give effect to the wishes of the settlor where possible, and not invalidate a trust where a reasonable interpretation can be found in which the trust would be valid.

*Word count: 1934*

[^1]: (1840) 49 ER 58, (1840) 3 Beav. 148.

[^2]: e.g., Graham Virgo, *Principles of Equity and Trusts* (2nd edn, OUP 2016) 78, 107; cf. *McPhail v Doulton* \[1970\] 2 All ER 228 (HL) 240 (Lord Wilberforce): distinction is ‘narrow’ and ‘artificial’.

[^3]: \[1955\] Ch 20 (EWCA Civ).

[^4]: \[1968\] UKHL 5, \[1970\] AC 508.

[^5]: \[1970\] UKHL 1, \[1971\] AC 424.

[^6]: \[1972\] EWCA Civ 10, \[1973\] Ch 9.

[^7]: e.g., *Re Coxen* \[1948\] Ch 747, \[1948\] 2 All ER 492.

[^8]: \[1978\] Ch 49, \[1978\] 2 WLR 411.

[^9]: \[1943\] AC 320, \[1943\] 1 All ER 16.

[^10]: \[1979\] 1 WLR 278, \[1979\] 1 All ER 296.
