---
title: Is the functionalist account of pain plausible?
---

The functionalist theory of mind attempts to formulate a consistent, materialist explanation of the nature of the mind, and relationship between mind and body, addressing some criticisms levelled against other materialist theories, but leaving others potentially in question. This essay will argue that the functionalist account of pain is plausible (which I take to mean valid and coherent) but fails to be entirely persuasive, leaving gaps which remain to be explained by some other theory.

A simple form of a materialist theory of mind posits that mental states are exactly equivalent to physical states — that is, that thoughts, sensations, and emotions correspond to particular characteristic patterns of neural activity. In turn, this has been criticised for failing to explain corresponding mental states in potentially very different physical forms — the multiple-realisation objection. In short, when a human experiences pain, this is equivalent to a particular physical brain state; but a non-human being may have a brain very different to a human brain, yet experience something clearly identifiable as pain. The naïve materialist account seems to imply that if a being’s brain is sufficiently different from humans, none of their feelings can be meaningfully considered to be the same as any human feelings, even if by any ordinary definition of those feelings they are the same. It doesn’t appear to conform with our common sense; what we mean by ‘pain’ seems to be something more about how an individual behaves in certain circumstances, not what precise kind of neural activity they display.

The functionalist explanation attempts to address the multiple-realisation objection by holding that, rather than being identical with a particular physical state, a mental state is identified with a physical state that holds a particular function. (TODO expand on functional roles)

Thus, when a human is exposed to some harmful or dangerous stimulus, their brain responds in a particular characteristic way that neuroscience can recognise, that leads to certain familiar responses (crying out, for example). Another living being, subjected to similar harmful stimuli, might respond in equivalent ways; yet even if its brain is sufficiently different that the stimuli is processed in an entirely different way, the functionalist approach allows this to be considered an equivalent state: another representation of the feeling of pain, a brain-state which represents the same mental state. (TODO go back and expand on the states?)

Problems with this approach, however, can arise when we ask ourselves what it is that the functionalist approach is actually telling us about pain. Is it actually explaining what pain *is*? Or is it, as the name suggests, simply telling us what pain *does*? [@matravers2011 61, 71] That is, for a functionalist, pain is whatever brain state is produced by certain harmful or unpleasant stimuli and results in certain kinds of behaviour such as wanting to avoid similar stimuli. Yet as an explanation of pain, this leaves a lot of gaps: it tells us nothing about the experience of pain, how pain is perceived by the subject. A functionalist definition could very well apply to a computer program; but such a program would tell us very little about what it is like for a human to be in in pain. This is not to say that functionalism is incorrect; but while it may be a true description of what function pain performs and how certain physical and mental states correspond with one another, this is only one aspect of the question, and not perhaps the most relevant one.

A functionalist response to this might be to question whether it is really possible for a mental state to be distinguished from its functional role [@matravers; @matravers2011]. In other words, while the qualia objection is that functionalism explains only what pain *does* and pays no attention to how it actually feels, Price responds that even if we might imagine a conscious mental state to be different from its functional role, it is not clear that it in fact is. Our conscious perception of a mental state may be influenced by further factors such that our subjective experience of it appears more complex or even entirely distinct even if it is not so.

This suggests that the qualia objection does not disprove functionalism; however, nor does functionalism seem to provide a clear rebuttal of the qualia objection. If we are unsatisfied by functionalism’s lack of an explanation of the actual *experience* of pain, then even if it is true that this is in practice indistinguishable from its functional role, this does not seem to be any more satisfying. Functionalism therefore seems plausible, but no more than that.