---
title: Critically compare act utilitarianism and rule utilitarianism.
---

Utilitarian ethical theories were originally propounded by Jeremy Bentham in *An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation* and John Stuart Mill in *Utilitarianism*. Both authors would have agreed on the basic principle of utilitarianism, formulated by Mill as “actions are right in proportion as they tend to promote happiness, wrong as they tend to produce the reverse of happiness”. However, they and subsequent utilitarians have disagreed on various other aspects, including how best to quantify and compare the happiness promoted by a given action and indeed the nature of happiness itself.

Bentham’s version of the theory has been characterised as ‘crude’, in which view Mill’s version is seen as a refinement or improvement [@barber2011 50]. However, the changes Mill proposes are significant enough to constitute an entirely distinct theory, requiring separate justification.

For Bentham, an ethical action is one whose ‘tendency it has to augment the happiness of the community is greater than any it has to diminish it’ [@barber2011 183]. It seems to be implied, and has been criticised on the basis, that each individual act must be evaluated in its own right. Mill, then, addresses this, with the theoretical innovation that later came to be referred to as ‘rule’ utilitarianism; he observes that the end goal of maximising utility does not preclude other ‘secondary’ principles to that effect, and that therefore there is no need ‘to endeavour to test each individual action by the first principle’ [@cottingham2008 517].

Mill, however, does not outright suggest ‘rule’ utilitarianism in any strong sense, and indeed is inconsistent on the matter [@barber2011 80]. Instead it seems that he intended ethical rules as a kind of heuristic, ‘signposts’ towards the final ethical outcome, and that utilitarianism would be no different from other ethical systems in that way.

Later utilitarians (and other consequentialists[^conseq]) formalised versions of the theory based on rules, conceiving of moral actions as being those that are in keeping with rules that would bring about the greatest happiness for the greatest number. These attempt to address seemingly counterintuitive outcomes from act utilitarianism. An act utilitarian might, for example, justify theft or murder so long as it produces more overall utility. For example, if there were several transplant patients requiring a donor of a rare blood type, act utilitarianism suggests that killing a healthy person in order to harvest their organs would be the moral thing to do [quoted in @sep2019].

Rule utilitarianism is not the only solution to these counterintuitive cases. A distinction might be drawn between action and inaction: between murdering someone and allowing them to die [@sep2019]. This indeed is in keeping with common ethical intuition, but it does not appear to be justifiable by reference to the principle of utility: *why*, given an otherwise identical amount of utility (equal number of deaths, etc.) should murder be worse? This in turn has further implications; should a utilitarian oppose euthanasia, for example? Attempts to reconcile these objections turn act utilitarianism into a much more complicated theory than the simple statement of principle would suggest.

Rule utilitarianism then proposes that the bearer of utility is a rule or set of rules; that a society in which this or that rule is accepted and obeyed is one with greater overall utility than one without. Thus for example a rule can be formulated along the lines of “it is forbidden to actively end somebody’s life”, which does not have to reckon with the possibility that in certain situations it is possible for killing to produce greater utility than not-killing. The transplant example is therefore solved in a way that would match with most people’s intuitions: that killing an innocent person even to save the lives of others is forbidden.

It may of course still be necessary to adjust these rules to account for varying circumstances; for example, a proviso regarding consent could be made in order to treat euthanasia as different from murder. However, while for act utilitarianism such provisos would have to be made to the general principle (“the greatest good for the greatest number unless it means killing an innocent person”, perhaps, to account for the transplant example), in rule utilitarianism the principle remains unamended and each specific rule (or set of rules) remains consistent with that principle (“it is forbidden to actively end somebody’s life without their consent”, perhaps, to permit euthanasia).

However, rule utilitarianism is not without its potential complexities. The question remains to be resolved of the conditions under which a given rule might increase utility.

[^conseq]: “After the middle of the 20th Century it has become more common to identify as a ‘Consequentialist’ since very few philosophers agree entirely with the view proposed by the Classical Utilitarians, particularly with respect to the hedonistic value theory.” [@sep2014] As the act/rule distinction applies to the consequentialist aspect of utilitarianism I have made reference to these in this essay.