---
title: Why does Popper think that observations cannot confirm a scientific theory? Is he right?
---

Over the course of a number of works, Karl Popper developed a theory of the scientific method building on the sceptical position of David Hume. Building on Hume’s argument, in the *Enquiry concerning Human Understanding*, that inductive reasoning was a rationally unjustifiable, yet necessary, basis for knowledge, Popper argued that the scientific method should not and need not rely on induction at all. This essay will first explore Popper’s argument against inductive reasoning, and then evaluate it against opposing viewpoints, including Hume and Kuhn.

Popper begins from a position of criticising the prevailing understanding of science as ‘proceed[ing] from observation to theory’, dating back to Francis Bacon.

He begins by criticising the possibility of ‘observation’ in the abstract. He suggests that a collection of ‘observations’ made without a specific purpose in mind would be worthless. ‘Observation is always selective.’ [@cottingham2008 457]. This seems to highlight a practical problem, at least, with the Baconian model of scientific enquiry; if observation precedes theorisation, then observation without a directed goal must be possible. Yet, in reality, the collection of every observable fact would be, at best, useless, being too large a quantity of data to usefully draw any conclusions from; moreover, it would almost certainly be shaped by preconceptions — different individuals would prioritise different observations. Observation is subsequent to theorisation, then: either confirming or refuting what was previously believed about the world.

Popper likewise rejects the importance of ‘confirmation’ or ‘verification’ of a theory: these are easy, he claims, to find; and an observation should only ‘count’ if it is ‘risky’. That is, there is a probabilistic element to the value of observation: if the theory tells us something which is aligned with our ‘unenlightened’ expectations, and this prediction is then confirmed to be true, we have learned nothing; a device which predicts the result of a random coin toss with 50 percent accuracy has no value greater than simply guessing the result.

A ‘good’ scientific theory, then, is one which ‘forbids certain things to happen’, and a test of the theory is an attempt to find a violation of this: to find an occurrence which would be forbidden by the theory and thus impossible if the theory were true.

He derives this reasoning from Hume. Hume rejects the validity of inductive reasoning as real proof of anything: “The contrary of every matter of fact is still possible; because it can never imply a contradiction” [in @chimisso2011 70]. So for Hume (and Popper finds this conclusive) no amount of observation can constitute an absolute proof: observing the existence of any number of black ravens does not disprove the existence of ravens which are not black. Only deductive reasoning can establish logically necessary conclusions, but deductive reasoning could not be based upon empirical observations.

Popper departs from Hume in the consequences of this, however. Hume establishes the unreliability of induction, but does not substitute an alternative basis for knowledge. Instead he proposes what Popper calls a ‘psychological theory’, by which human learning proceeds on the basis of experience and habit rather than logic. For Popper this is a failure; Hume, he thinks, has ‘not seriously considered’ the possibility that knowledge is actually not obtained by induction at all.

Popper’s answer, therefore, was to invert the process: rather than theory arising from observation, theory (or ‘conjecture’) preceded observation; observation should be an attempt to refute the conjecture.

Thus a theory ‘all ravens are black’, as mentioned, cannot be reliably proven through observation; observation cannot exclude the possibility that ravens of other colours exist but have escaped observation. But for Popper, the vital process is to attempt to *disprove* it. This refutation can be made deductively sound:

- If all ravens are black, then all ravens that are observed must be black.
- A raven is observed that is not black.
- Conclusion: not all ravens are black; the conjecture is false.

Popper considers that every observation of a black raven would be a corroboration: if a sufficiently large quantity of ravens have been observed, it appears increasingly unlikely that the theory is false, and it is thus increasingly valuable. But this is never provable deductively; these conclusions are only ever ‘tentative’, even if increasingly reliable.

Yet Popper’s view of scientific methodology brings with it some problems. For example, while he himself objected to the notion of ‘neutral’ observation, even using it as part of his rejection of the Baconian view, he does not seem to give full weight to the consequences of this (in effect, doing precisely what he accuses Hume of). A theory is tested by an observation; but that observation is itself impacted by any number of other theories that are taken for granted: it is *theory-laden* [@chimisso2011 123]. Popper purports to be providing not only a pragmatic heuristic for acquiring knowledge, as Hume did, but rather a logically sound principle; yet, when presented with a theory of unknown truth-value, and data which appears to corroborate or falsify that theory yet itself is of unknown provenance, Popper fails to justify his assertion that the data should simply be trusted [@chimisso2011 124].

Other critiques suggest that, while perhaps appealing, Popper’s account does not actually represent science as it is done in practice. Feyerabend, for example, argues that there is no single method that has been universally applied [in @chimisso2011 125].

Kuhn’s objection is similar. For Kuhn, emphasising a historical view of science as it has been carried out in practice, Popper’s account is taking unusual cases, of entire theories being disproven and discarded, as representative of the scientific process as a whole. While Popper accepts that scientists may remain ‘dogmatically’ attached to a theory and attempt to ‘rescue’ it when disproven, he treats this as an aberration. For Kuhn, on the other hand, ‘normal science’ does not attempt to disprove a theory. Rather, the work of science for the most part is to solve ‘puzzles’, by which he means ‘normal research problems’ for which ‘the outcome … can be anticipated’ but ‘the way to achieve that outcome remains very much in doubt’. This is to say that while the theory precedes the observation, as Popper claims, the work is primarily an attempt to confirm rather than to refute that theory. The problems ‘can be assumed to have solutions’; that is, a positive outcome is expected; and while eventually flaws in a theory might accumulate to such an extent it has to be discarded, this is not the normal aim of scientific research.

Neither Feyerabend nor Kuhn prove Popper’s account to be false; yet Popper purports not just to show a way in which knowledge *can* be acquired in a logically sound way, but the way in which it *is* acquired; he is not proposing a methodology which could be chosen in preference to but in parallel with Hume’s account, for example, but attempting to describe how science in fact works. Thus Popper’s account is brought into question, not as logically unsound but as irrelevant: it is an account of science perhaps as it ought to be done, but not as it in fact is. It is not clear, therefore, whether Popper has actually proven Hume wrong; it may well be the case that knowledge is gained inductively. In this case, perhaps the question lies in the semantics of ‘confirmation’ — observation may not ever allow a theory to be proven true in the deductive sense, but nevertheless provide enough confirmation for the scientific process to function.