---
title: Essay
author: Benjamin Eskola
header-includes: |
  \usepackage{fancyhdr}
  \usepackage{titling}
  \pagestyle{fancy}
  \fancyhead[L]{\theauthor}
  \fancyhead[C]{Contract Law}
  \fancyhead[R]{\thedate}
  \fancyfoot[C]{\thepage}
---

This question raises a number of issues. It revolves around a contract of sale, which purports to incorporate certain standard terms; these standard terms, in turn, purport to exclude any implied warranty. Both of these points are contentious. Firstly, the issue of incorporation: did the terms in question actually take effect as part of this contract? Secondly, the issue of validity: if the terms were incorporated, were they in fact invalidated either by statute or for some other reason?

On the matter of incorporation, there are a number of possibilities. Judge’s presumed position, that the terms were straightforwardly incorporated, may not be supportable; however, nor is it a foregone conclusion that the interpretation most favourable to Irwin is the correct one.

The first point in Irwin’s favour is that the terms were not mentioned by Judge until after payment. As the transaction was a simple sale of goods, it does not even allow the potential complexity of _Thornton v Shoe Lane Parking_[^1] or _Chapelton v Barry Urban District Council_.[^2] There is no question that there had been offer and acceptance already, and that therefore the contract was complete and could not have terms added to it.

Nevertheless, Irwin ought to be wary. The terms in question are purportedly industry standard terms. This may bring the case within the scope of _British Crane Hire Corporation Ltd v Ipswich Plant Hire Ltd_.[^3] In that case, it was held that, although certain terms had not been specifically agreed to on a particular occasion, they were nevertheless binding. A number of factors contributed to this finding: that the parties had regularly done business on the same terms was mentioned but not decisive; more important was the fact the parties were in the same industry, and that they therefore knew that terms similar to these were ordinarily applicable.

In the case at hand, there is no suggestion that Irwin and Judge had done business prior to this occasion; in particular, Irwin was not aware of Judge’s use of the ADWOC terms, which would suggest that, presuming the two _had_ done business previously, it was not consistently on the same terms: in _McCutcheon v David MacBrayne_[^4] the inconsistent application of the terms was sufficient to exclude them. However, it may be argued by Judge that these terms were sufficiently commonplace that Irwin could reasonably have expected them to apply. Conversely, however, there are distinctions to be drawn: Irwin acknowledges that he was aware of the existence of these terms, but not their details, suggesting that the terms in question were not so widely used as those in the former case. Furthermore, _British Crane Hire_ dealt with an urgently-concluded contract in which the parties might be excused the normal formalities; whereas in the case at hand there seems to be no indication of any urgency and therefore no reason why terms should not have been discussed prior to the conclusion of the sale.

If Judge is entitled to presume that the ADWOC terms apply on the grounds that they are standard, then the fact that Irwin was unaware of the nature of the terms is unlikely to work in his favour. It has been long established, following _Parker v The South Eastern Railway Company_,[^5] that it is not the claimant’s awareness of the terms that is material, but rather the defendant’s having given reasonable notice of the terms. And, as established in _Thompson v London, Midland and Scottish Railway Company_,[^6] the relevant standard is simply that the terms are ascertainable by a reasonable person; there is no duty to ensure that every party is specifically aware of the terms, only that they can become so. As it appears in the case at hand that Irwin had every opportunity to make himself aware of the terms before agreeing to them, Judge may argue that the terms are valid for that reason. However, this seems likely to be insufficient: in both _Parker_ and _Thompson_ the existence of terms was mentioned (in writing) before the contract was concluded, even if the actual terms themselves had not been read; in the current case, Judge did not do anything to draw Irwin’s attention to the terms until after the conclusion of the contract.

We return, then, to _Thornton_ and _Chapelton_: Judge ought to have notified Irwin at least of the existence of the terms before the sale was made. If he had done so, he could not be held liable for Irwin’s neglect to read them; but as he had not done so, Irwin’s ignorance is irrelevant. (Consider the alternative possibility: if the seller was permitted to notify the buyer of terms only after the sale was complete, the buyer’s reading or not reading would be irrelevant, as it could not alter their applicability.)

Therefore, it seems likely that the ADWOC terms were not incorporated into the contract. However, in the case that they were incorporated, Irwin may still have recourse on the grounds that the disclaimer is invalid. The Sale of Goods Act 1979 and Consumer Rights Act 2015 provide an implied term of fitness for purpose in business-to-business and business-to-consumer contracts respectively. If Irwin is considered a consumer, this would be the stronger position for him: the implied terms under the 2015 Act (ss 9–10) cannot be excluded, and as such (providing it is agreed that a clock that does not keep good time is not fit for purpose) Judge will be in breach of this implied term. However, since Irwin and Judge are both antiques dealers, and Irwin intends to resell the goods, it is likely that it will be excluded from the 2015 Act (which refers to ‘wholly or mainly outside that individual's trade, business, craft or profession’), and as such it will instead fall under the 1979 Act (s 14), in which situation the position is more complex. In this case, Judge would be able to exclude liability if it was reasonable to do so; it would be for him, not Irwin, to prove that it was so. A number of factors that the court is to consider on the question of reasonableness are listed in the schedule to the Act, not all of which would be relevant to the present case; one which would affect this case is the question of ‘whether the customer knew or ought reasonably to have known’ about the disputed term. This, of course again resolves to the question above regarding Irwin’s knowledge of the ADWOC terms.

This would also depend on whether the clock was indeed not fit for purpose. In the case of an ordinary clock, this might be obvious; the purpose of a clock is to keep time, so if it fails to do so it is unquestionably not fit. However, in the case of an antique clock, the purpose may differ, particularly if Judge knew of Irwin’s intention to make repairs before selling it; an item that is fit to be renovated for sale is not the same as (and likely cheaper than) one that is in good working order for an end user. However, not much detail is given regarding the negotiation of the sale, so it is difficult to determine whether this argument might be available to Judge.

If not relying on the term implied in statute (of fitness for purpose), Irwin might also be able to argue for a term implied in fact: in _The Moorcock_,[^7] it was held that there was an implied term in the contract warranting that the ship berth was safe, on the ground that it would be unreasonable not to make such a warranty; the wharf owner had the opportunity to ascertain safety and warn the ship owner, and the failure to do so, while still advertising the berth for hire, was interpreted as a guarantee that the risk did not exist. In the current case, this could apply as follows: Judge, as the current owner and seller, has had the greater opportunity to determine the condition of the clock, and Irwin, as the buyer, has had a lesser opportunity, if at all. Without such knowledge, Irwin could be said to be taking an unknown risk by buying the clock, in this case one which would cost significantly more to repair than it was bought for. However, this proposed term would do little that the statutory terms did not and would fall to the same problem of disclaimer of warranty. It would require the extremely narrow possibility, that the disclaimer of implied warranties was not incorporated or not valid, but that the statutory term was also not applicable.

Irwin might also consider a claim based on misrepresentation. Again, without details of the negotiations, it is difficult to determine the likelihood of success of such a claim. We are told, for example that Irwin had intended to do ‘minor work’ before reselling it; however, Judge claims that it will cost several times more to repair the clock than it was sold for in the first place; if Judge had given Irwin the false impression that only minor work was necessary, this might be a misrepresentation and, if so, would entitle Irwin to damages. Again, several factors are relevant, including the fact that both parties are in the same business. If Irwin had not been an expert, his claim of misrepresentation might be stronger; _Oscar Chess Ltd v Williams_[^8] deals with the reverse, a non-expert selling to an expert, but seems to suggest that the expert party cannot expect the non-expert to know the condition of the goods better than they. Conversely, _Dick Bentley Productions Ltd v Harold Smith Motors_[^9] involves an expert selling to a non-expert; the seller was found to have misrepresented, but in the present case this still leaves open the question of whether any representation was actually made regarding the functioning of the clock. Further, if Irwin can be considered an expert (perhaps unhelpfully conflated with a professional in the preceding cases), then they might be distinguished on the grounds that Irwin could just as easily have recognized the problem beforehand. This is particularly true if Irwin had the opportunity to inspect the clock beforehand (and in fact the opportunity to inspect goods limits the impact of some rights under the Sale of Goods Act).

Overall it seems that Irwin’s strongest argument will be on the ground that the terms were never incorporated. He has some basis for this claim, supported by authorities. If, however, the terms were found to have been incorporated, he might still have a successful argument on the ground that the exclusion of liability was contrary to statute; this would, however, permit a defence of reasonableness to be made. A case made on the ground of misrepresentation would depend on facts which are not provided.

_Word count: 1802_

[^1]: [1970]() EWCA Civ 2.
[^2]: [1940]() 1 KB 532.
[^3]: [1973]() EWCA Civ 6.
[^4]: [1964]() 1 WLR 125.
[^5]: [1877]() 2 CPD 416.
[^6]: [1930]() 1 KB 41.
[^7]: (1889) 14 PD 64.
[^8]: [1957]() 1 WLR 370.
[^9]: [1965]() 1 WLR 623.

#essay
