---
title: Aspects of realism and fantasy in _Stardust_ and _The Dispossessed_
nocite: |
  @benatti2019
---

> Richard Danson Brown writes, ‘realism does not preclude fantasy, any more than fantasy precludes realism’ [-@brown2019 11].

Works of fantasy have long included reflections of the real world to a greater or lesser extent. In works of science fiction that attempt to explore the impact of technical advances, authors such as Arthur C. Clarke painstakingly followed scientific laws in order to maintain verisimilitude. J.R.R. Tolkien, a professor of English and linguistics, applied linguistic rules to the development of languages in his fantasy writings. Ursula Le Guin spoke of her use of anthropology in her writing: to ‘hint at the complexity of the society’ [@wray2013] rather than present a more simplistic world.

Neil Gaiman and Charles Vess’ _Stardust_ [-@gaiman2019] begins in a recognisably real time and place. Dates are given, at least approximately, as are distances and directions to real-world place: the late 1830s, by reference to the accession of Queen Victoria, her first Prime Minister, and the publication of Charles Dickens’ _Oliver Twist_, among other things; and somewhere in the north of England, or perhaps Scotland, ‘a whole night’s drive’ from London to the south. Indeed, many works of realist fiction are similarly vague about their location in time and space; Hardy’s books are unquestionably set in the south-west of England during the 19th century, but the places he describes are fictional, though inspired by real ones, and cannot be dated more accurately than, perhaps, a given decade.

Yet _Stardust_ also deviates from realism just as soon as it begins to establish it: the second sentence of Chapter One is an ironic reference to genre convention, an acknowledgement that this is a story, rather than the more typically realist abstraction. Then, as the chapter progresses, it continues to combine fantasy and realism; as well as beginning to introduce the fantastic nature of the wall, the gateway, and the meadow beyond it, it also describes the village itself, its people, and in particular the way of life that has developed around the wall. It tries to present not merely a fantastical location, but a real place that is given no choice but to interact with a fantastical one.

Ursula Le Guin’s _The Dispossessed_ [-@leguin2002] also begins with a description of a wall, once again one which appears ordinary and yet, we are immediately told, has great significance despite this. Unlike Gaiman, Le Guin does not attempt to establish the location in time and space by reference to any other (though as the story progresses further details do provide reference points). However, to a greater extent than in _Stardust_, Le Guin provides detail of the setting that establishes it in a realist way. The descriptions start to give a sense of the place that will be explored further: both the ‘durable, grimy, and mournful’ dormitory building, and the tantalising reference to the ‘No Trespassing’ sign that, like the boundary wall, is the only one of its kind on the planet. As part of an _in medias res_ opening, it serves to draw the reader’s curiosity and give a sense of the world that is being left, as Shevek travels immediately to another, very different planet.

We are also given a sense of Shevek’s home after he has left it, while travelling on the spaceship, by the things he finds unusual, and what he does and does not take for granted: for example that ‘the water value did not cut off when you released the faucet, but kept pouring until shut off’ (p. 10), or the disposability of paper and clothing (p. 12–13). We begin to realise that he has lived under conditions that do not permit waste; indeed, the very phrase ‘it costs less’ has great significance to him. These descriptions of the setting therefore allow us to learn something significant about the character.

However, it is worth noting that these aspects of realism are not unique to either of these works but an inherent and necessary part of fantastical fiction. Many works of fantasy were intended as, or at least can be interpreted as, satire or social critique: not only _The Dispossessed_, for example, but perhaps also _Sir Gawain and the Green Knight_ [@hahn2006 225; quoted in @brown2019b 140]. And even works which do not do so (or are not read in such a way) gain much of their power from their relation to reality; in Brown’s example of _The Lord of the Rings_, ‘The Shire is … a realistically described yet idealised landscape based on the English countryside’ [@brown2019 11], which allows the reader to relate to the characters in a very different way than if the home they set out from had been entirely unrecognisable.

_Stardust_ might be interpreted in this light. It does not have the same deeply philosophical and political intent as _The Dispossessed_ (though of course intent and effect are not the same thing). But locating its starting point in a recognisable English village brings with it cultural assumptions that shape how we read it; for example, we can imagine how Dunstan or Tristran might feel about their lot in life, or about the young women that each is infatuated by, and so on. As noted, _Stardust_ combines this familiar reality with an ironic awareness that the characters are on a quest.

_The Dispossessed_, on the other hand, because of the social critique it contains, requires a level of realism simply in order for that to be effective. A critique of an entirely fictional and unrecognisable society would have no critical impact; a reader would be unable to identify any applicable meaning behind the surface level. In this case, _The Dispossessed_ progressively explores two very different societies. The protagonist’s homeworld of Anarres is a society very different from our own; we learn from both narrations in the chapters set on Anarres and Shevek’s explanations in the chapters set on Urras that it has no governments and instead has a communal, self-organising nature. Urras, by contrast, is very recognisable to us, with multiple states operating in ways broadly recognisable to Western Europeans or Americans. We learn that the society on Anarres began as a political movement on Urras (p. 94), in a fictional history that has some inspiration in real-world political history: though not a true parallel, the idea of a radical philosopher and a worldwide movement of followers is a recognisable one.

Thus, as the book progresses we see the critique develop; both of capitalism as we learn more about Urras through Shevek’s eyes, but also of the negative sides of the socialist society on Anarres. This can further be interpreted in light of Le Guin’s historical context, as an American author during the Cold War, left-leaning but critical of the USSR [@johnson2019a 260–66].

The influence of realism extends beyond verisimilitude of setting. Both _Stardust_ and _The Dispossessed_, to some degree, explore the thoughts and feelings of their protagonists. Again, they are not unusual in this regard in modern fantasy, although Le Guin is perhaps notable in the emphasis she places on it [@johnson2019 239]. But this is not universal in fiction, either. Modes such as fairy tale and folk tale treat characters more as archetypes, with little individuality; pre-realist works such as _Sir Gawain and the Green Knight_ are similar.

For example, during Chapter 1 of _The Dispossessed_ we see Shevek’s state of mind progressively, as he experiences Urrasti society first-hand for the first time and begins to understand it; this is the beginning of a character development as he becomes disillusioned with Urras. In Chapter 2, a parallel development begins, as we see his childhood and the beginning of his recognition of the contradictions and hypocrisies in Anarresti society.

Similarly, in _Stardust_, we can see a development in the character of Tristran over the course of the novel. Though inspired by fairy tales, Tristran is not truly a fairy tale character but something closer to a realist one; we gain an understanding of his motivation, not just his actions, and moreover how that motivation changes. In Chapter 2, when he is introduced, his intent is only to impress Victoria, and over the next several chapters he pursues this single-mindedly, to the point of callousness; yet in the second half of the book, and particularly by the final chapter, his motivations have changed.

_Stardust_ and _The Dispossesed_, then, are not unique in integrating realist conventions into a fantastical story; much modern fantasy literature does so (and, as Le Guin argued, fantasy and science fiction ought to be _read_ as literature, not relegated to a secondary category unworthy of critique and unable to explore deeper ideas [@leguin2016 104–05; quoted in @johnson2019 245]). These realist conventions can and do coexist with a fantastical setting, whether our own world with magical occurrences introduced into it, or a wholly other world. What is necessary for realism in this sense, then, is not that they be literally true (after all, Casterbridge and Middlemarch are not real places either). Nor is it even that they be potentially true in some sense, taking place in the ‘real world’ or something like it. Rather it is that the setting and the characters are developed and explored in a realistic way.
