---
title: Relationships between men and women in _The Bloody Chamber_ and _Sir Gawain and the Green Knight_
---

Angela Carter’s _The Bloody Chamber_ [-@carter2006] is a collection of short stories best described as inspired by fairytales — not, the author insisted, ‘adult versions’ of fairytales, but an attempt to ‘extract the latent content’ from them (quoted in the introduction). As such they present a vision of gender relations which has been found disturbing by some: yet one which, she argued, was there all along: ‘the latent content is violently sexual’. The anonymously-written _Sir Gawain and the Green Knight_ [transl. @armitage2009], on the other hand, has no such explicit intention — indeed, we know nothing for certain about the author’s intentions. Yet it, too, portrays relations between men and women in a way that might produce an insight into its times.

Carter’s story ‘The Tiger’s Bride’ is one of the most striking in the collection in its critique of the patriarchal family — literally, in this case, since one of the men in question is the narrator’s father. As the tale begins, the unnamed female narrator has just been ‘lost … to the Beast at cards’ by him — a striking opening line in itself, presented almost casually, out of nowhere, yet with unmistakeable bitterness.

The scene is sumptuously described: the ‘black earth and blue forest’ he has lost, the ‘withering candles [and] emptying bottles’ she watches with ‘furious cynicism’ as the game progresses. Her place, as a woman, is to remain silent, almost an ornament herself, even as her father gambles her life away (which indeed he is doing even before she becomes the wager).

The objectification is made explicit by the narrator when she lists what is at stake: her father would not only recoup all his losses but win vast wealth from his opponent too:

> _You must not think my father valued me at less than a king’s ransom; but, at *no more* than a king’s ransom._ (p.&nbsp;59)

The price he demands, she soon learns, is to see her naked, after which he will return her to her father, along with everything he won at cards and more. Yet, as she ironically implies, this is to treat her as nothing more than a prostitute, and she asks that she be paid “only the same amount of money that you would give to any other woman in such circumstances” (p.&nbsp;65). There is a seeming contradiction here: “that he should want so little was the reason why I could not give it” (p.&nbsp;68); perhaps marriage, though a greater demand, would have been easily submit to, in turn suggesting a critique of marriage as an economic–sexual transaction fundamentally comparable to prostitution.

The narrator goes on to compare herself to the clockwork maidservant: “had I not been allotted only the same kind of imitative life amongst men that the doll-maker had given her?” (p.&nbsp;70). Women are “denied rationality” (_ibid._) by men; men are the only beings permitted agency in patriarchy, while women are objectified in both a conceptual sense (entities which are acted on by another, not entities that act by their own impulse) and indeed a literal sense (things exchanged as commodities, markers of wealth traded as property). This short story then inverts and subverts that power dynamic: the narrator accedes to his request, but in such a way as to regain agency, and so as to be freed from the social (and indeed perhaps human) dynamics that have produced this power structure in the first place.

The titular story of the collection, ‘The Bloody Chamber’, also explores the power dynamic of heterosexual, capitalist marriage, though to rather different (yet similarly critical) effect. It begins on a night train, on the evening of the teenaged narrator’s marriage to a much older man. As in ‘The Tiger’s Bride’, Carter’s description is sumptuous: the ‘opulent male scent of leather and spices’, the ‘rugs on the floor [of the library], deep, pulsing blues of heaven and red of the heart’s dearest blood’ (pp.&nbsp;3,&nbsp;12).

Here, the narrator is not literally traded for money; yet, economic concerns are inevitably at play. Her mother had ‘beggared herself for love’ (p.&nbsp;2), and they had lived in poverty since her father’s death; she refuses to say that she loves her soon-to-be husband, only that she is sure that she wants to marry him, ironically disbelieving of her mother’s seeming reluctance to escape poverty (_ibid._).

From an early point concerns are raised about his previous marriages. Initially these seem like the expected concerns of a protective mother: married ‘three times within my own brief lifetime’, his last wife only dead three months (p&nbsp;4–5). And here, as in ‘The Tiger’s Bride’, we see a suggestion of objectification: his first three wives an opera singer, a painter’s model, a fashionable countess; the narrator, a talented young musician; there is a strong suggestion that the narrator’s reference to his ‘taste’ and his ‘gallery of beautiful women’ (p.&nbsp;5) is not merely metaphorical.

As the story progresses, the narrator discovers her husband’s violent nature and the brutal demise of his previous wives; as so often in Carter, this violence is entangled with morbid sexuality and _fin de siècle_ decadence. Her disobedience of him is to be punished by death, decapitation prefigured by the ruby necklace he had given her as a gift (p.&nbsp;36).

It is in the final scene that the power dynamic is again inverted; the Marquis meets his own demise at the hands of the narrator’s mother. Her own adventurous past had been hinted at earlier and mocked by the narrator: carrying her late husband’s gun in case ‘she was surprised … on her way home from the grocer’s shop’ (p.&nbsp;2). [Expand: mother/widow as hero? Rescue not by a handsome prince etc.]

_Sir Gawain and the Green Knight _ involves very different dynamics between men and women, but although the author almost certainly did not intend such subversion of patriarchal relations as Carter did, they can still be read in that way.

The key section lies in Fitt III, which consists of a recurring pattern of passages: a hunting scene followed by an interaction between Gawain and the Lady, followed by the return of the hunters and the exchange of prizes between Gawain and Sir Bertilak.

This repeating pattern itself suggests a particular gender dynamic: the flirtation between Gawain and the Lady is made equivalent to hunting a noble — or dangerous — creature. Equivalent in reward, or in risk? Gawain certainly seems to feel that his honour is at risk.

Then in Fitt IV Gawain expresses anger, or perhaps bitterness, at the outcome: ‘all wicked and ruined by their [women’s] wrongs’ (l.&nbsp;2420). But this is not the only viewpoint expressed by the characters on this subject. While Gawain appears unable to forgive himself for his weakness, and at the same time holds the Lady responsible for his temptation, neither Sir Bertilak nor King Arthur seem to consider him blameworthy. Bertilak tells him outright that he has paid his penance (l.&nbsp;2392), and Arthur declares the garter to be a new symbol of the order (ll.&nbsp;2515–16). It has been suggested that the Gawain poet thus inclined to this point of view, rather than Gawain’s own more misogynistic opinion [@brown2019a 174–80]; according to Brown, this could form part of ‘an indirect satire of the absurdities of chivalric ideals’. This might suggest a general understanding that these ideals are unrealistic (general enough that there is an audience for such satire); on the other hand, another possible reading would absolve Gawain of blame, as Bertilak and Arthur seem to, while endorsing his misogyny (i.e., the absurdity might be suggested to be the impossibility of anybody living up to such ideals in a world filled with untrustworthy women).

As Brown warns however, it is difficult to make any judgments about intent when there is so little evidence as to either the author’s intent or the reactions of contemporary audiences. But the structure of the text — with Arthur’s reassurance leading immediately into the close — can easily be interpreted as an authorial endorsement of this rather than Gawain’s refuted judgment.
