---
module: Reading and studying literature
title: Narrative techniques, linguistic features, and context of Voltaire’s *Candide*
wordcount: 1243
---

Voltaire’s *Candide* is a work that is difficult to classify — while often described as a novel, it does not entirely meet the usual criteria. Rather than a consistent plot, the events recounted are inconsistent bordering on the surreal, since Voltaire’s purpose is less to tell a story than to satirise his philosophical opponents, particularly Leibniz. Making heavy use of irony, he attempts to show that the world cannot possibly be ‘the best of all possible worlds’, while the characters struggle to reconcile the events they experience with the philosophy they have been taught or that they themselves espouse.

In the quoted extract, Voltaire’s particular blunt style can be seen in a number of places. He aimed, according to a translator, to create “a new language of plain-speaking” [@voltaire2009 p. xxxiii], writing matter-of-factly about subjects that were otherwise delicately euphemised in eighteenth-century Europe. The character of the old woman thus discusses the possibility “to be raped a hundred times by negro pirates, and have a buttock cut off”, and later reference is made to Paquette’s continuing to “ply her trade”, i.e., prostitution. For Voltaire this was not simply an attempt to shock, but a sincere belief in the necessity of clear language — as part of the Enlightenment, the importance of freedom of speech, the free exchange of ideas, was of fundamental importance to him, and imprecise language was both aesthetically unpleasing and morally questionable [@pacheco2018 212].

But there is a second purpose to the blunt discussion of rape, mutilation, and prostitution, which is as part of the irony of the work as a whole. The book has been a series of catastrophic events, either encountered directly by Candide on his travels or recounted to him by those he meets; here, they are repeated or alluded to, yet in such a way as to seem almost ordinary and expected. The possibility is still left open that this is the best of all possible worlds, while the absurdity of this in the face of the evidence is left for the reader to conclude. So, for example, in the given passage, the narrator describes “heads neatly stuffed with straw being taken to be displayed before the Sublime Porte”; but the response of the characters is merely to argue a little more before returning to their state of extreme boredom. Later, their reunion with Paquette and Girofleo, “in the last extremes of human misery” produces no greater response from the characters than “philosophizing more than ever”.

Aside from the characters’ own reactions to events, the narration itself contributes to this satirical effect. Throughout the text, Voltaire describes the events portrayed with a detached tone: the aforementioned detached heads, the sufferings of Paquette and Girofleo, or the disfigurement of Pangloss. Similarly, the justifications provided by Pangloss for the circumstances they encounter are presented at face value; the irony is produced in the obvious contradiction between events and justifications. However, by this late passage, Pangloss’s explanations have grown more feeble: unable to convince anyone of his worldview, he nevertheless insists on standing his ground: “having once maintained that everything was going splendidly he would continue to do so”.

Here Voltaire is particularly satirising those Optimists who, after the Lisbon earthquake of 1755, continued to espouse the same beliefs as if nothing had happened [@pacheco2018 211]. For Voltaire, such a tragic and pointless event could not be justified in terms of a divine plan; the continued assertion that this was ‘the best of all possible worlds’ was thus contemptible, based either in self-deception or outright dishonesty. Pangloss, indeed, “believ\[es\] nothing of the kind”, despite his outward protestations to the contrary. Despite having “suffered horribly, all his life”, his pride will not permit him to openly change his mind — perhaps a reference in particular to those who, like the Duchess of Saxe-Gotha, experienced personal losses but were nevertheless unswayed in their beliefs [@pacheco2018 209].

There is a recurring theme in the passage of lists, the monotony of which seems to add to the irony. The “effendis, pashas and cadis” being exiled, and “more cadis, more pashas and more effendis” replacing them; the old woman’s list of ways they have suffered; the recounting of Paquette’s and Girofleo’s sufferings towards the end of the passage; and Pangloss’s loss of “the end of my nose, and an eye, and an ear”. in each case, the continual listing produces an effect that is almost absurd, rather than inspiring genuine sympathy. The suffering they endure borders on the comical, rendering it even more comical that the philosophy of optimism might still be found convincing.

Despite the usually unruffled tone, however, Voltaire’s narrator is not entirely neutral, describing the views of Martin as ‘detestable’. It would be simplistic, however, to assume that this was therefore a philosophy with which Voltaire himself disagreed. Martin is described as a “Manichaean”, that is, one who believed that evil (and good) was inherent in the world rather than being blamed upon God [@voltaire2009 143—44]. As such, it was an alternative solution to the problem that the Optimists grappled with. Martin’s philosophy is “detestable” to the Optimist Pangloss and his students, but by contrast Voltaire himself considered it more sympathetically, while remaining unconvinced [@voltaire2009 111, 144]. As such, the character of Martin acts as an antagonist to the other characters, presenting a point of view that directly opposes theirs but which they cannot easily refute.

The setting of this section of the book, too, is significant. The characters have travelled from Western Europe, via Portugal and South America, to Constantinople, and the vision of Constantinople that we are presented with is one that conforms with the dominant Western European stereotypes of the time. The ‘Orient’ was seen as increasingly stagnating in contrast with Western progress, its people seen as fatalists compared with the independent-minded Europeans [@pacheco2018 223]. Here this is signified by the stream of “more cadis, more pashas and more effendis arriving to take the place of those who had been expelled, and themselves being expelled in turn”. There is a constant unchanging routine of tyranny and oppression to which the inhabitants of the empire subject themselves unquestioningly. Voltaire himself took a particular interest in the knowledge of Asia and Asian religions which was reaching Western Europe during his lifetime, which served his purposes by undermined Christinity’s claim to uniqueness and thus preeminence [@said2003 77].

The choice of Constantinople as a setting is significant for another reason, too. Voltaire, as part of the Age of Enlightenment, dedicated his writing career to polemicising against the “Ancien Régime”, the absolutist monarchy of France during the long eighteenth century. As such, the tyrannical and obscurantist Ottoman Empire may be interpreted as a metaphor for France itself. The Ottomans’ supposed belief in destiny was thought to contribute to the despotism of its rulers [@pacheco2018 223]. Readers may have been expected to infer a comparison between Turkey and France, and the virtues of particular modes of thought that this would imply. That would place this work in the Swiftean tradition of satire: using imaginary (or real but fictionalised) places and their virtues or vices to critique the home country [@pacheco2018 203].

Overall, *Candide* can be understood in the context of Voltaire’s liberal (anti-absolutist and anti-clerical) philosophical project as a whole, as well as in the contemporary literary tradition of satire and the Orientalist cultural fascinations of the period. The studied passage exemplifies many of these themes present in the work as a whole.
